# 1.22 Release Notes

Release date: TBA

::: info NOTE
**This is a preview work-in-progress release, which may have breaking changes introduced at any time.** Choose it if you're in the early development stages or need a specific feature unavailable in the stable release. Note that preview releases are not published on Unity's Asset Store and have to be [installed from GitHub](/guide/getting-started#install-from-github).
:::

## Compatibility

Supported Unity versions: `6.7` LTS release (with the latest patches).

Non-LTS (tech, beta, and alpha) releases are not supported. Any issues with future Unity releases will be addressed in the next Naninovel versions. Compatible Unity releases for past Naninovel versions are listed in the [release notes](https://naninovel.com/releases).

## Upgrade Guide

When upgrading a project with Naninovel version 1.20 or older, first follow the [v1.21 release](/releases/1.21) upgrade guide, then continue with the following instructions:

1. Back up the project or use a [VCS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control) to be able to roll back in case something goes wrong.
2. In case using [VS Code extension](/guide/ide-extension), update both the extension and VS Code itself to the latest versions.
3. Install the new release. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/getting-started#install-from-github)
4. Run the upgrade script via `Naninovel/Upgrade/v1.21 to v1.22` Unity editor menu.
5. In case using following attributes in custom C# extensions, rename them:
   - `[ExpressionFunction] -> [ExpressionQuery]`
   - `[ConstantContext] -> [EnumContext]`
   - `[Alias(NamelessParameterAlias)] -> [PrimaryParameter]`
6. The `BGM` and `SFX` resources are now separated and `Audio` resource prefix is no longer used. The upgrade script automatically assigns existing `Audio` resources as `SFX`. You will need to reassign the music clip assets as `BGM`. You can do that in batch by selecting multiple clip assets and choosing `BGM` in the inspector header. [<sup>[demo]</sup>](https://i.gyazo.com/407f5e0ab612a242b88acb698f82eb72.png)
7. In case initializing custom meta (previously "global") variables with the [@set] command, add `meta!` flag (the `g_` prefix no longer has any significance and can be removed).
8. In case using decimal or integer parameters in custom commands, change the type to `NumberParameter`.
9. In case using variable APIs in C#, update the names: what was "CustomVariable" before is now just "Variable"; for example, `ICustomVariableManager` is now `IVariableManager`.

::: warning
Compatibility of save data between Naninovel releases is not guaranteed. When patching a shipped project with a new Naninovel version, make sure that existing saves work as expected.
:::

## Added

- Added inline comments. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/scenario-scripting#comment-lines)
- It's now possible to use whitespace in values without wrapping, eg: `@set a=1, b=2`.
- Added line and command decorations to the VS Code extension. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/ide-extension#decorations)
- Added support for nesting with tabs. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/scenario-scripting#nesting)
- Added expression operator aliases. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/expressions#operator-aliases)
- Added [@or] command, which works as a shortcut to `@else if:...`.
- Added the Universal Actor implementation, which uses native URP rendering and supports most built-in renderers out of the box. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/characters#universal-characters)
- Add options to control URP camera stacking to the camera configuration.
- Added ruby support to the default choice buttons.
- Added `Clear Save Data` utility to the Naninovel editor menu allowing to quickly purge saved games and global state, such as unlocked tips.
- It's now allowed to have partial localization documents; ie Naninovel no longer throws when a scenario or managed text localization document is missing (a warning is still logged).
- Added support for spaces in labels, eg `# My Label` and `@goto # My Label`.
- Added an option to control the indent type (tab or four spaces) to the VS Code extension.
- Added a played line indicator to the VS Code extension instead of selecting the played line text.
- Actor order is now always stable, making features like auto arrange produce consistent results between runs.
- Added fuzzy search and advanced grouping to the dropdowns throughout the editor menus. [<sup>[demo]</sup>](https://i.gyazo.com/5776a9f4aec514effacc277dac0b33a3.png)
- Added `Instant Reveal On Continue` option to the revealable text printers (enabled by default). When disabled, the "Continue" input won't instantly complete the gradual text reveal effect. [<sup>[demo]</sup>](https://i.gyazo.com/c3f0499c0107df5e66302c7e59722ccb.png)
- Added script text constants to the expression auto-completion list in the VS Code extension.
- Added `to` parameter to [@set] command allowing to specify a shared value to be assigned to the variables.
- Added `meta!` and `const!` flags to [@set] command allowing to designate the variable kind without using special name prefixes.
- Added scenario variable scopes and local scope. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/variables#variable-scopes)
- Added rename refactoring, auto-completion filtering, go to definition and find declarations features for scenario variables in VS Code extension.
- Added auto trimming for layer composition expressions which prevents accidental white space or new lines breaking them.
- Added error reporting when exception occurs while waiting for a queued add actor task.
- Added public APIs to `BridgingService` allowing to communicate with the attached bridging servers, such as the VS Code extension and Story Editor.
- Added binary load progress to the Story Editor appearing when loading takes more than 3 seconds.
- Added auto reload feature to the Story Editor, which automatically reloads the embedded editor to install the update after it's downloaded.
- Updated Arabic support script to the latest version, which now correctly handles TMPro tags and various edge cases.
- Added `pos` parameter to the audio commands allowing to control the audio source position, aka "3D audio". [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/audio#spatial-audio)
- Added `Aspect Ratios` option to the camera configuration allowing to enforce specific aspect ratios on the managed cameras. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/gui#enforcing-aspect-ratios)
- Added rename field to the resource header editor allowing to rename compatible resources without using dedicated editor menus. [<sup>[demo]</sup>](https://i.gyazo.com/aeadf0c133f6db7b3ad1764dab1b9bdb.png)
- Added `waitFade` parameter to [@bgm] and [@sfx] commands that allows waiting for the fade-in/out, while `wait` parameter now allows waiting until the played audio ends.
- Added `pitch` parameter to [@bgm], [@sfx] and [@voice] commands that allows changing the perceived frequency (speed) of the played audio.
- Added `easing` parameter to [@bgm], [@sfx] and [@voice] commands that allows animating the audio properties with a tween.
- Added [@linkPrinter] and [@unlinkPrinter] commands allowing to override [linked printers](/guide/characters#linked-printer) at runtime.
- Added nesting capability to the [@printer] command which will auto-link the printer while the nested context is executing and unlink on exit.
- Added `[PrimaryParameter]` attribute that can be used as a shortcut for `[Alias(PrimaryParameterAlias)]`.
- Added auto trimming for the values submitted by `VariableInputUI`.
- Added `Clear Color` option to camera configuration allowing to change the color used to clear the screen when rendering with the default camera without setting up custom camera prefab.
- Added support for the latest Live2D Cubism SDK based on the URP renderer.
- Added a customizable notification when state recovery occurs.
- Added system font fallback in editor when rendering glyphs unsupported by the game fonts.
- Added auto registration of the generated localization documents with the addressables when installed.
- Added `Import Source` option to the Spreadsheet utility. When enabled, the source scenario scripts will be rewritten with source locale column in spreadsheets. Useful for proofreading the scenario content along with translations.
- Improved [@choice]: it can now be used without restrictions, including in conditional and non-deterministic contexts.
- Added cut/copy/paste operations for lines in Story Editor.
- Added an option to paste from clipboard directly into Story Editor allowing to paste, for example, scenario scripts from the docs or VS Code directly to the editor.
- Added an option to select and drag drop multiple lines in Story Editor.
- Added context commands for tabs in Story Editor: close, close all, close other, close to left/right.

## Changed

- The minimum-supported Unity version changed to `6.3`.
- Removed the legacy script graph and visual scenario editor (use [story editor](/guide/editor) instead).
- Removed the legacy `@animate` command (use [@async] instead).
- Changed assignment expression separator from `;` to `,` (semicolon is now used by inline comments); use the upgrade script to automatically upgrade scripts.
- Expression functions have been renamed to queries; all the associated APIs and features have to be updated accordingly.
- Renamed `[ConstantContext]` metadata attribute to `[EnumContext]` to prevent confusion with the newly introduced expression constants.
- The `g_` and `t_` custom variable prefixes no longer have any significance. To initialize meta (previously "global") variables with [@set] command use `meta!` and `const!` flags for metas and constants respectively.
- The concept of "Nameless Parameter" is renamed to "Primary Parameter" for clarity.
- Replaced `IntegerParameter` and `DecimalParameter` with a single `NumberParameter`.
- Renamed APIs related to variables from "CustomVariable" to "Variable"; for example `ICustomVariableManager` is now `IVariableManager`.
- Separated `BGM` and `SFX` audio resources: they now each have their own resource loader and category.
- Changed the effect of `wait` parameter on [@bgm] and [@sfx] commands: it's now waiting until the played clip ends instead of waiting for fade-in/out to finish; added `waitFade` parameter to do that instead.
- The layered actor implementation is deprecated and will be removed in the next release. Use the new universal actor implementation with the `Layered Actor Controller` component instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/characters#layered-characters)

## Fixed

Most fixes associated with bugs found during the pre-release stage are backported to the previous stable release and are not listed here; find them at the "Patches" section of the previous release changelog.

- Fixed printer resources not being unloaded from memory when the actor is removed from the scene.
