# 1.12 Release Notes

Release date: Jul 2020

> [!CAUTION]
> **This release is out of support and won't receive any new features or bug fixes.** Consider upgrading to the latest stable or preview release as soon as possible. Note that supported (stable and preview) releases are not published on Unity's Asset Store; [register your license](https://naninovel.com/register) to access them.

## Compatibility

Supported Unity versions range: from `2019.4.7` to `2020.1`. Previous versions are not supported; compatibility issues with newer (major) versions will be addressed once they're out of beta.

Recommended Unity version: [Latest `2019.4` LTS release](https://unity3d.com/unity/qa/lts-releases?version=2019.4).

## Upgrade Guide

When importing the package to a project with Naninovel version `1.10` or older first follow [v1.11 release](/releases/1.11) upgrade guide, then continue with the following instructions:

1. Remove `Naninovel` folder from the project before importing the updated package.
2. In case you're using extension packages, update them using following links:
    - [NaninovelPlayMaker](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelPlayMaker/raw/master/NaninovelPlayMaker.unitypackage)
    - [NaninovelLive2D](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelLive2D/raw/master/NaninovelLive2D.unitypackage)
    - [AdventureCreator](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelAdventureCreator/raw/master/NaninovelAdventureCreator.unitypackage)
3. Update TextMeshPro (`com.unity.textmeshpro`) to the verified version via package manager.
4. In case using SpriteDicing extension, update it and regenerate the atlases (make sure to enable "Keep Original Pivot" in atlas config).

Remember to keep `NaninovelData/Resources` folder and `NaninovelData/EditorResources.asset` file when updating the engine to preserve project configuration and asset references.

Be aware, that in-game saves (slots in save/load menu, values in settings menu and global game state) created with previous versions could cause unexpected behavior when loaded with the updated version; when patching a shipped project with a new Naninovel version, make sure existing saves work as expected.

In case you're using Atom IDE extension, [check for updates](https://atom.io/packages/language-naniscript) to handle changes in the commands API. Should the extension fail to work after the update, try manually deleting the extension directory and installing it again; re-installing Atom itself could also resolve the issue.

## Added

- Added an option in UI configuration menu to disable override of the managed UIs object layer.
- Added `Render Material` property to `Layered Actor Behavior` component, allowing to use a single custom material when rendering the layers.
- Added `Reversed` property to `Layered Actor Behavior` component, allowing to render the layers in reversed order.
- Added an [upgrade script for UniTask v2](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelWeb/blob/master/docs/guide/unitask.md#upgrading-to-unitask-v2).
- Added `IInputIndicator` interface allowing to provide an arbitrary "waiting for input indicator" object implementation.
- Added dark skin for visual script editor; enabled when Unity editor is using "Professional" theme.
- It's now possible to [inject custom data to actors metadata](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelWeb/blob/master/docs/guide/custom-actor-implementations.md#custom-metadata).
- It's now possible to copy and paste lines in visual script editor.
- It's now possible to override all the public and protected members of the built-in engine service implementations.
- It's now possible to rewind by clicking a line in visual script editor, while holding `Shift` key (can be configured in script configuration).
- It's now possible to use any renderers derived from `UnityEngine.Renderer` as layers in layered actor implementations.
- SunShafts, Rain and Snow built-in FX now have a proper fade-out animation when despawned.

## Changed

- Due to `com.unity.textmeshpro` verified status in Unity 2019.4.7 release has been changed to a newer version, which has breaking changes, minimum Unity version supported by Naninovel has also changed to 2019.4.7.
- When `Render Material` is not assigned, layered actor behavior will now use material from layer renderer component instead of a single predefined material; this allows assigning different materials for specific layers.

## Fixed

- Fixed state manager loading settings and global state later than expected.
- Fixed an unnecessary error logged when attempting to remove a non-managed UI.
- Fixed input indicator positioned incorrectly when reveal speed is set to max value (instant).
- Fixed custom dissolve appearance transitions failing to rollback properly.
- Fixed built-in searcher scripts conflicting with `com.unity.searcher` package.
- Fixed layered actors inconsistent render state when rolling back during appearance transition.
- Fixed TMPro text printers excessive material assignments.
- Fixed list record in editor menus deleted when "Delete" key is pressed while editing record's text field.
