# 1.14 Release Notes

Release date: Oct 2020

> [!CAUTION]
> **This release is out of support and won't receive any new features or bug fixes.** Consider upgrading to the latest stable or preview release as soon as possible. Note that supported (stable and preview) releases are not published on Unity's Asset Store; [register your license](https://naninovel.com/register) to access them.

## Compatibility

Supported Unity versions range: from `2019.4.7` to `2020.2`. Previous versions are not supported; compatibility issues with newer (major) versions will be addressed once they're out of beta.

Recommended Unity version: [Latest `2019.4` LTS release](https://unity3d.com/unity/qa/lts-releases?version=2019.4).

## Upgrade Guide

When importing the package to a project with Naninovel version `1.12` or older first follow [v1.13 release](/releases/1.13) upgrade guide, then continue with the following instructions:

1. Remove `Naninovel` folder from the project before importing the updated package.
2. In case you're using extension packages, update them using following links:
    - [NaninovelPlayMaker](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelPlayMaker/raw/master/NaninovelPlayMaker.unitypackage)
    - [NaninovelLive2D](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelLive2D/raw/master/NaninovelLive2D.unitypackage)
    - [AdventureCreator](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelAdventureCreator/raw/master/NaninovelAdventureCreator.unitypackage)

Remember to keep `NaninovelData/Resources` folder and `NaninovelData/EditorResources.asset` file when updating the engine to preserve project configuration and asset references.

Be aware, that in-game saves (slots in save/load menu, values in settings menu and global game state) created with previous versions could cause unexpected behavior when loaded with the updated version; when patching a shipped project with a new Naninovel version, make sure existing saves work as expected.

In case you're using [VS Code IDE extension](/guide/ide-extension), check for updates to handle changes in the commands API.

## Added

- It's now possible to select voice language independently of the main localization in the game settings menu. ([guide](https://github.com/Elringus/NaninovelWeb/blob/35d4a5be99ee45721b9308a8247e2c3c03baa9de/docs/guide/voicing.md#voice-language))
- Unused resources are now automatically released when navigating between naninovel scripts (via `@goto` command); state reset is no longer required.
- Improved CG gallery resource management: only the items displayed on the current page will load; previously, all the CG items were preloaded on opening the gallery, which caused freeze with large amounts of CG resources.
- IDE extension now provides completion for expression functions and custom variables.
- Added an option to affect all camera components (via `*` symbol) for `toggle` and `set` parameters of `@camera` command.
- Added script graph synopsis: first comment lines in the naninovel scripts will now be added to the script nodes, representing scenario synopsis. Can be disabled via `Show Synopsis` property in the script configuration. ([example](https://i.gyazo.com/b57642abdc387a0df0d719b6a98bcf1f.png))
- Added an option to specify non-uniform (x,y,z) scale with `@animate` command.

## Changed

- `Reset On Goto` (state configuration) is now disabled by default for new projects. Consider disabling the option for existing projects as well, as the unused resources are now automatically released when navigating between naninovel scripts and state reset is no longer required. Don't forget to remove `reset` parameters in the `@goto` commands after disabling the option.

## Fixed

- Fixed state manager initializing sooner then expected.
- Fixed Rollback UI saving visibility state by default, which cause inconsistent behavior of the UI when rolling back.
- Fixed scene transitions disabling skip and auto play modes.
- Fixed `@despawn` command not printing script position on warnings.
- Fixed IDE extension not recognizing script expressions inside generic text lines, which contains inlined commands.
- Fixed CG gallery not updating item unlock status while the UI is opened.
- Fixed depth of field effect flickering on despawn.
- Fixed some spawned FX (eg, dof, rain, snow, sun shafts) gradually revealing after loading a game, while they're expected to be fully revealed.
- Fixed state rollback stack reset on goto preventing from rolling back to the previously played script.
- Fixed UI resources referenced in script commands using prefab names instead of resource names.
- Fixed incorrect color of the comment lines in the visual script editor when using dark editor scheme.
- Fixed nullref exceptions when editing TMPro printer prefabs in play mode.
- Fixed script lines searcher navigation in Unity 2020.2.
- Fixed look camera mode not working correctly when using camera offset.
- Fixed "shake" FX and `@animation` command freeze editor when running in a loop.
- Fixed numeric values parsing in IDE extension on non-English OS locales.
