# 1.20 Release Notes

Release date: Q4 2024

::: info NOTE
**This is a preview work-in-progress release, which may have breaking changes introduced at any time.** Choose it if you're in the early development stages or need a specific feature unavailable in the stable release. Note that supported (stable and preview) releases are not published on Unity's Asset Store; [register your license](https://naninovel.com/register) to access them.
:::

## Compatibility

Supported Unity version range: `2022.3.45 - 6`. Only latest patches of the LTS streams in the range are supported; compatibility issues with newer Unity releases (once they reach LTS) will be addressed in the next Naninovel releases. Be aware, that alpha, beta and non-LTS releases (eg `2022.1` or `2022.2`) are not supported. They may work, but we won't be able to provide any support for using Naninovel with them.

Recommended Unity version: [2022.3.45](https://docs.unity3d.com/2022.3/Documentation/Manual/WhatsNew2022LTS.html). It's not uncommon for Unity to introduce regressions even in LTS patches (let alone major releases), so we highly recommend using this version to minimize production risks.

## Upgrade Guide

When upgrading a project with Naninovel version 1.18 or older first follow [v1.19 release](/releases/1.19) upgrade guide, then continue with the following instructions:

1. Backup the project or use a [VCS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control) to be able to rollback in case something goes wrong.
2. In case using [VS Code extension](/guide/ide-extension), update both the extension and VS Code itself to the latest versions, then run `Naninovel: Purge Cached Metadata` command via `View -> Command Palette` and restart VS Code.
3. Remove `Naninovel` and `NaninovelData/Saves` folders from the project and import the updated Naninovel package.
4. Reset `Script Parser` in scripts configuration (when not using custom parsers, just re-select the only available option), restart Unity editor and re-import scenario scripts.
5. Revise how script assets are stored in Unity project: it's now required for all scripts to be stored under a single root directory (`Assets/Scenario` by default, can be changed in scripts configuration via `Script Root` option); when a script is stored outside the specified root, a warning will be logged.
6. In case organizing script assets under sub-directories of the script root, make sure to reference them by their local paths; for example, to navigate to `Assets/Scenario/Prologue/Day1.nani` script, use the following command `@goto Prologue/Day1`.
7. Due to scripts now being identified by their local paths instead of just name, localization and auto-voicing have to be re-generated; to preserve existing translations, make sure localization documents mirror scripts file structure. For example, Japanese localization document for `Assets/Scenario/Prologue/Day1.nani` script has to be at `Assets/Resources/Naninovel/Localization/ja/Text/Scripts/Prologue/Day1.txt`. Use [localization sample project](https://github.com/naninovel/samples/tree/main/unity/localization) as a reference setup.
8. Some managed text documents may need to be regenerated, as some records associated with static fields used to have incorrect keys; for example, `GameSettingsFontDropdown.DefaultFontName` record inside `DefaultUI` document had `Naninovel.UI.GameSettingsFontDropdown.DefaultFontName` key.
9. Add `SkipMovie` input binding to the input configuration menu or input actions asset (when using new input system) with the desired bindings to skip movie playback (`Esc` by default).
10. In case using `@if` conditional blocks, either make sure the commands inside blocks are not indented or switch to the new syntax with indentation and remove `@endif` command. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#conditional-blocks)
11. In case using `@elseif ...` commands, replace them with `@else if:...`.
12. In case using `do` parameter of `@choice` command, replace it with nested callback. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/choices#nested-callback)
13. In case using `do` parameter of `@wait` command, replace it with `@delay` command. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#delay)
14. In case using `@startTrans` and `@stopTrans` commands, replace them with `@trans`. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#trans)
15. In case using `[skipInput]` command, replace the occurrences with `[< skip!]` generic parameter. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#generic-parameters)
16. In case using `ExpressionFunctions` attribute to expose custom expression functions, remove the attribute from the class and instead apply `ExpressionFunction` attribute to the methods of the class. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/script-expressions#adding-custom-functions)
17. In case using `remove` parameter of `@hide`, `@hideAll` or `@hideChars` commands, remove the parameter and instead use `@remove` command after hiding the actors. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#remove)
18. In case using Live2D or Spine extensions, remove the extension directories and follow setup instructions on the dedicated character guides (both extensions have been merged with the main package). You may also have to re-assign character implementation types in the configuration after finishing the setup. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/characters#live2d-characters)
19. In case using async methods of Naninovel C# API, remove the "Async" suffix; eg, `Command.ExecuteAsync` is now `Command.Execute`.

> [!WARNING]
> In-game saves (slots in save/load menu, values in settings menu and global game state) created with previous versions may cause undefined behavior when loaded with the updated version; when patching a shipped project with a new Naninovel version, make sure existing saves work as expected.

## Added

- Added compiler localization feature allowing to re-map all the NaniScript compiler specs: control characters, command and parameter names, constants and basically anything you have to type when authoring scenario scripts. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/localization#compiler-localization)
- Added nesting concept to NaniScript allowing to specify a block of commands nested under (associated with) other command. Various existing commands are now using this concept for more readable and concise syntax; added several new commands, which were previously impossible to represent in NaniScript without the new syntax: [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#nesting)
    - Upgraded `@if` and `@else` commands to support nesting; [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#conditional-blocks)
    - Upgraded `@choice` command to support nesting; [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/choices#nested-callback)
    - Merged `@startTrans` and `@finishTrans` commands into `@trans`; additionally, it's no longer required to specify `time:0` for each underlying command — they'll complete instantly by default; [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#trans)
    - Added `@while` command for looping nested commands as long as condition is truthy; [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#while)
    - Added `@delay` command allowing to delay execution of nested commands;  [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#delay)
    - Added `@random` command allowing to randomly execute one of its children;  [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#random)
    - Added `@group` command allowing to join multiple lines into single execution block;  [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#group)
    - Added `@await` command allowing to await nested async commands before continuing script playback. Intended to be used with `Wait By Default` disabled in script player configuration, which is now the default in new projects. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#async-execution)
- Added boolean flags as shortcuts for boolean parameter values. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#boolean-flags)
- Added a way to apply print parameters for parts or whole generic text lines. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#generic-parameters)
- Added a way to delimit slack white space in generic lines with `[]` (empty inlined command). [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#white-space-delimiters)
- Added `Conservative` and `Optimistic` resource policy modes instead of `Static` and `Dynamic`. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/memory-management)
- Script file names no longer have to be unique and can be referenced by their local paths; for example you can have `Scripts/Prologue/Day1.nani` and `Scripts/MainRoute/Day1.nani` and reference them as `@goto Prologue/Day1` and `@goto MainRoute/Day1`.
- It's no longer required to specify assemblies for custom types via `Type Assemblies` property in the engine configuration; the option is removed.
- Naninovel can now be installed as a UPM package.
- Live2D and Spine extension have been merged into the main package; it's no longer required to install dedicated packages to activate the integration.
- Improved engine initialization time by caching types on build instead of resolving them via reflection at runtime.
- Script and managed text resources are now loaded on-demand, which significantly reduces RAM usage and improves engine initialize time in large projects.
- Added `Label By Scripts` option to the resource provider configuration; when enabled (default) will label all the Naninovel addressable assets by the scripts in which they’re used; when `Bundle Mode` of the addressable group is set to `Pack Together By Label`, asset bundles will be optimized for the project scenario structure improving load times and RAM usage. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/resource-providers#script-labels)
- Player read progress feature no longer incurs runtime overhead, as the required data is cached at build time; `Count Total Commands` option is removed from the scripts configuration, as it's now always available/enabled by default.
- Added `Remove Actors` option to resource provider configuration; when enabled (default) unused actors will be automatically removed and associated game objects disposed when unloading script resources, w/o the need to use `@remove` commands. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/memory-management#removing-actors)
- Added `Async Instantiation` to the engine configuration; when enabled (default) will move the object instantiation off the main thread for improved performance and smooth asset loading.
- Generic, Live2D and Spine actors now support multiple appearances applied at once to make setting up complex animation states easier. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/characters#multiple-appearances)
- Added `Join Lines` to localization utility. When enabled, generic lines in localization documents will be kept in single line for convenience. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/localization#joined-lines)
- Annotations inside localization docs now also include gist of the translated content to give translators more context. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/localization#annotations)
- Added `lock` parameter to `@choice` command allowing to lock/disable a choice. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/choices#locked-choice)
- Added `Auto Detect Locale` to localization configuration. When enabled (default) will attempt to auto-detect locale using system language when the game is started first time. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/localization#default-locale)
- Added continue input prompt to pagination reveal effect before changing page.
- Layered actor prefab instances are now nested under the associated actor game object; this adds support for behaviour which depends on object transform, such as lighting, interactive spots, etc.
- Added `Camera Mask` option to layered actor behaviour component allowing to specify additional camera layers to preserve when rendering the actor; use to support render features, which require dedicated camera layers, such as Unity's 2D Light.
- Added `Has Name` to character configuration; when disabled, neither display name, nor actor ID will be displayed in printer UI. Useful for narrator-type characters with linked printers. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/characters#display-names)
- Added an option to supply font with community localization. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/localization#community-localization)
- Added `Separator Literal` to built-in Tips UI allowing to change character used to separate title, category and tip text in managed text records.
- Added `Selected Prefix`  to built-in Tips UI allowing to change unlockable ID prefix used to indicate that item was selected (seen) at least once.
- Added `TipsPanel.HasUnselectedItem()` method allowing to check if the tips panel contains any unselected items.
- Added `Build Resources` editor menu allowing to build Naninovel-related project resources (including addressables, when enabled) without building the player.
- Added `lazy` flag to `@char`, `@back`, `@camera`, `@slide` and some other commands allowing to not complete the animation when player skips it; useful for blending long-running async animations, such camera panning.
- Added a way to create identified text references by prepending `&` to the identifier. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#identified-text-references)
- Added an option to specify alias and documentation for custom expression functions.
- Numeric expression function parameters are no longer limited to `double`.
- Added `Play SFX While Skipping` option to audio settings; when disabled, `@sfx` commands without `loop!` will not play while skipping.
- Added `as` parameter to `@print` command allowing to set custom name label; when combined with `author` parameter now handling multiple authors (delimited with `,`) and all authors specified with `*` — useful for representing multiple characters authoring single text line. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/characters#name-labels)
- Added a way to include script expressions to localization documents and force re-evaluation when locale is changed. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/text-printers#reveal-expressions)
- Added graceful handler for missing fonts: warning is logged and default font is used instead of throwing an exception.
- Added `block` parameter to `@movie` command allowing to block player interaction while the movie is playing to prevent skipping.
- Added `SkipMovie` input binding dedicated to skipping movies (previously shared `Cancel` binding).
- Added `@remove` command for disposing actors. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#remove)
- Added `Support Custom Opacity` option to text reveal fader effect; when enabled the effect will respect `<alpha>` tags and limit max opacity when fully revealed at the cost of some performance overhead.
- Added `type` parameter to `@input` command allowing to enforce type of the input variable value.
- Added `Include Author To Backlog` option to text printers configuration allowing to not include author of the printed messages to the backlog; disabled by default for "Fullscreen" printer.
- Added `Scene Path Root` option to scene background actor settings allowing to change the root directory of the scene assets associated with the actor appearances. [<sup>[demo]</sup>](https://i.gyazo.com/207b721a062ffa7870df1005a0552a3e.png)
- Engine now has its own CSV parser and no longer depends on the third-party library.
- IDE (VS Code) extension improvements:
    - Added rename refactor option for labels, script files and folders. [<sup>[demo]</sup>](https://i.gyazo.com/b35279c0c37631a144bf2fd9d373e02a.mp4)
    - The extension is now capable of formatting NaniScript documents. [<sup>[demo]</sup>](https://i.gyazo.com/a109c49ab9b08cd009c35e76fd485c4c.mp4)
    - Label auto-completion and diagnostics no longer requires syncing metadata with editor;
    - Added `Debounce Delay` setting to optimize diagnostic performance. The extension will no longer diagnose on each document change and instead accumulate changes and process them in batch with the specified debounce interval (500ms by default).
    - Already specified parameters are no longer suggested in the auto-completion list;
    - Parameters, that has no effect or not supported by the command, such as `if` parameter in `@if` command and `wait` parameters in commands that are not async, are no longer suggested in the auto-completion list;
    - Parameter values with expression context are now highlighted as expressions, even when the value is not wrapped in `{}`;
    - Localizable parameter values, such as printed text and choice labels are now highlighted independently to better distinguish "natural" text presented to player from other values.
    - Indented lines are now foldable. Useful for folding nested blocks, as well as adding custom folding regions by indenting lines;
    - Added an option to specify custom folding blocks;  [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/ide-extension#folding)
    - Added an option to specify context for expression function parameters.  [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/script-expressions#parameter-context)
    - Added support for minimap section headers.  [<sup>[doc]</sup>](https://code.visualstudio.com/updates/v1_88#_minimap-section-headers)
    - Added code highlighting to the example snippets inside tooltips.
    - Added common configuration defaults to the extension contributions: token colors, hiding `.meta` files, word wrapping, etc.
    - Added weak (informational) warnings in VS Code when a dynamic parameter value is preventing resource preloading.
    - Appearances metadata (used for auto-completion in VS Code) for generic, live2d and spine actors is now generated based on trigger parameters in Animator component of the implementation prefab.

## Changed

- Minimum supported Unity version changed to 2022.3.
- State reset now additionally invokes all the tasks added with `IStateManager.AddOnGameDeserializeTask` with an empty game state. This affects built-in variable trigger component, as well as backlog, variable input, chat printer and choice handler UIs, resetting their local state when exiting to title and starting new game.
- Target script of `@gosub` command is now always preloaded. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/memory-management)
- Removed `@elseif` command; use `@else if:...` instead.
- Removed `do` parameter of `@choice` command; use nested callback instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/choices#nested-callback)
- Removed `do` parameter of `@wait` command; use `@delay` command instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#delay)
- `Wait By Default` in script player configuration is now disabled by default in new projects.  [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#async-execution)
- Removed "Lazy" resource policy; use the new "Conservative" or "Optimistic" policies instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/memory-management)
- Removed `[skipInput]` command; use `[< skip!]` generic parameter instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/naninovel-scripts#generic-parameters)
- Removed `ExpressionFunctions` class attribute; use `ExpressionFunction` method attribute instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/guide/script-expressions#adding-custom-functions)
- Movies are now skipped with dedicated `SkipMovie` input binding (previously shared `Cancel` binding).
- Removed `remove` parameter from `@hide`, `@hideAll` and `@hideChars` commands due to undefined behaviour when the commands are not awaited; use `@remove` command after hiding the actors instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#remove)
- Normalized power of snow and rain effects to 0.0-1.0 range; default values are now 0.5 for both.
- Removed `@startTrans` and `@stopTrans` commands; use `@trans` instead. [<sup>[doc]</sup>](/api/#trans)
- Scenario scripts are now identified by their local resource paths, instead of just asset names; associated APIs have been changed accordingly.
- Removed legacy (playback spot) auto-voicing mode.
- Dropped "Async" suffix in all the async method names.

## Fixed

Most fixes associated with bugs found during the pre-release stage are backported to the previous stable release and are not listed here; find them at the "Patches" section of the previous release changelog.

- Fixed chat printer duplicating messages on locale change.
- Fixed chat printer not updating printed text on locale change until restart.
- Fixed some managed text records associated with static fields having full type name as keys instead of short type name.
- Fixed leading and trailing white space lost when importing localization CSV sheets that were edited with Microsoft Excel.
- Fixed visual editor adding extra space after command identifier when nameless parameter is not specified.
- Fixed VS Code maximizing and stealing focus when highlighting played lines.
- Fixed VS Code missing metadata associated with class-level attributes.
- Fixed VS Code mixing appearances of actors with same ID, but of different types.
- Fixed VS Code inserting script name when typing `.` to skip script in `@goto` and `@gosub` commands.
- Fixed VS Code extension failing to properly process file names with non-ASCII characters.
